Files which are needed for a Stanford FINGER, which are in FINGER: on
Sierra.

	FNGDEF.MAC
	TINIDF.MAC

	GETLOC.MAC

	TTYINI.MAC
	FINGER.MAC
	DBEDIT.MAC
	TTYLOC.MAC

	TTYINI.HLP
	FINGER.HLP
	DBEDIT.HLP
	TTYLOC.HLP

In addition, the following modules are needed, which can be found in
MRC:<MM> on Score.

	TCPIO.REL
	HSTNAM.REL

To build the FINGER system, do the following:

Create a directory with a system-wide logical name FINGER:.  Be sure
you are connected to the directory and have all the files listed above
in that directory.  Then do the following:

	COMPILE/COMPILE/NOBINARY FNGDEF.MAC
	COMPILE/COMPILE/NOBINARY TINIDF.MAC
	COMPILE/COMPILE GETLOC.MAC
	LOAD/COMPILE TTYINI.MAC
	LOAD/COMPILE FINGER.MAC
	LOAD/COMPILE DBEDIT.MAC
	LOAD/COMPILE TTYLOC.MAC

You will next need to build the two BIN files: one for for personal
names, and the other for default terminal locations.  To create the
TTYLOC bin file, simply run TTYLOC once, and it will create the file.
To create a FINGER.BIN file, you need a file, FINGER:FINGER.TXT which
has the format of:
	USER <tab> PERSONAL-NAME <cr>
for each user.  You can use FINGER:FINGER.TXT on Sierra as an example.

You will need a hook in your ACJ to update the last logout
information.  See Sierra's ACJ for details.

After you have created FINGER:FINGER.TXT, do the following:

	!DBEDIT
	%Warning: could not get database, rebuilding
	Name of text source text file: FINGER:FINGER.TXT
	[Confirm]
	DBEDIT>EXIT
	!

You then need a SYSTEM:TTYINI.NET-CMD file for the default locations.
The format is:
	HOST <site-name>
	<tty-number> [ <optional type> ] { <switches> }
	...
	HOST <site-name>
	(etc.)
Note that the HOSTs that are entered can only be Ethernet sites.  It
is recommended to just have the local host with terminal numbers and
location definitions.  The most used switches are:
	/DEFAULT-TYPE: <type>     - Terminal type if not previously set
	/LENGTH: <lines per page> - Number of lines long for terminal
	/ADDRESS: "<location>"    - String location of terminal.
It is recommended that only the local site have the terminal numbers
and addresses.  If other foreign hosts (other than SUNs, Altos, Tips,
or the like) must have address locations, then make sure that TTY0:
does not have an address, since TTY0: is used to look up information
if someone is netting from that host.

To keep this information up to date, a common source for non-20 hosts
has been established.  To receive the latest information, PUPFTP the
file SYSTEM:TTYINI.NET-BASE from Sierra and append it to your
hardwired terminal information.  In other words, at Sierra, the Sierra
static terminal data is prepended to this TTYINI.NET-BASE and together
this forms SYSTEM:TTYINI.NET-CMD.

Once you have SYSTEM:TTYINI.NET-CMD do TTYINI/BIN which will generate
the binary file.

If changes in the TTYINI.NET-BASE are needed, please send mail to
TTYINI-UPDATE@SIERRA and the file will be updated.  When reporting
changes for Tip terminals, please note that Tip terminal ports are now
in octal.

Changes which might need to be made to your EXEC are in the modules
EXEC0 (for the FINGER switches) and in EXECSU (for support for the
network TTYINI).

Finally, install TTYINI.EXE, FINGER.EXE, DBEDIT.EXE, and TTYLOC.EXE
onto SYS:, and TTYINI.HLP, FINGER.HLP, DBEDIT.HLP, and TTYLOC.HLP onto
HLP:.
